---
title: A summer of Links (Part 1)
date: 2019-07-28 10:32:00
description: Some of the work I've been doing on the Links compiler.
tags: compsci compilers links
draft: true
---

Over the last few months, I've been fortunate enough to take part in an internship program, as part of the University of
Edinburgh's [Laboratory for Foundations of Computer Science][lfcs]. At the end of the internship, I gave a talk on the
work I'd done over the summer - I thought it would be fun to write that talk up into a couple of blog posts, so it can
be somewhat immortalised on the web.

As a bit of a warning, none of these posts are going to include anything especially groundbreaking (and probably won't
be especially well written). I'm mostly writing this all up as a way to practice explaining these sorts of topics.

---

## An introduction: Links

[Links][links] is a research programming language developed at Edinburgh, designed for web programming. The [original
aim][without-tiers] was to remove the separation between the various "tiers". One can use the same language for the
frontend, backend and database, and interact transparently between the three. The language has grown since 2006, with
support for effect handlers, linear and session types, formlets, and much more.

As it doesn't see much production use, it's a perfect test-bed for trying out new ideas...

## Part one: Sugar for effect types
Let's talk about algebraic effect handlers! In languages like Haskell, one can represent computations, and the side
effects they may perform, as a monad. For instance, you have the list monad - which allows you to write
non-deterministic computations, or the state monad - which allows you to write computations which depend on some mutable
state cell.

Effects are an alternative way of expressing computation. We define a series of operations (such as get and put for a
state effect), and then provide handlers, which describe how that effect should be, well, handled.

In Links, one invokes an operation using the `do` expression:

```links
sig choice : () {Decide: () -> Bool|e}->Bool
fun choice() { do Decide }
```

Let's break this down a little:

 - In this example, `choice` provides a mechanism for non-deterministic choice - we invoke the operation, and get back a
   boolean, either `true` or `false`. We can then choose which path of a computation we take depending on the returned
   value.

 - Our operation here is called `Decide` - note it appears both in the type signature and the function's body.

 - The signature is a little strange. If we ignore the braces for now, `choice` is a function which takes no arguments
   and returns a boolean - as one might expect.

 - Everything within the braces represents the effects that the function performs. This is a polymorphic row - it has
   some fields (which represent the operation), and a latent effect variable (the `e` after the pipe), which says "we do
   some other effects."

 - The `Decide` operation is given a function type within the row - it takes no arguments and returns a boolean.

```links
sig choose_all : (() {Decide:() -> Bool|e}~> a) {Decide{p}|e}~> [a]
fun choose_all(c) {
  handle(c()) {
    case Decide(k) -> k(true) ++ k(false)
    case Return(x) -> [x]
  }
}

choose_all(fun() {
  filter(fun(_) { choice() }, [ 1, 2, 3 ])
}) : [[Int]]
```


[lfcs]: http://wcms.inf.ed.ac.uk/lfcs "The LFCS website"
[links]: https://github.com/links-lang/links "Links' GitHub repository"
[without-tiers]: http://links-lang.org/papers/links-fmco06.pdf "Links: Web Programming Without Tiers"
