---
title: "copy-cat: A ComputerCraft emulator for the web "
date: 2019-05-20 20:50:00
description: "Cloud-catcher is a web interface for ComputerCraft, which allows you to interact with remote computers through your browser."
tags: minecraft computercraft web
math: true
---

One thing I've been working on for a little while now is revamping [CC: Tweaked documentation situation][cct-doc]. As
part of that, I had the fantastic idea of "could we run CC: Tweaked in the browser?", allowing people to run code samples
with a click of a button.

Now, at the time, I wasn't aware of [EveryOS's fantastic Mimic fork][mimic], and so I did the only thing logical and
went on a long yak shaving expedition. The result of this is [copy-cat], a ComputerCraft emulator which runs in your
browser.

![copy-cat, running the [mbs] shell](/assets/img/posts/2019-05-20-mbs.png)

As it's original aim was to be used for documentation, it aims to be as accurate and up-to-date as possible. In order to
achieve this, copy-cat is built from a modified version of CC: Tweaked's source code - both the Lua VM and Java APIs
behave exactly the same[^fn].


While this is all well and good, that's not all copy-cat can do. There's all sorts of other fancy features, including:

 - Built-in editor, with access to all of Monaco's goodness.
 - Download the computer's file contents as a zip file. And then drag-and-drop that zip back into the file browser to
   open it again!
 - Take screenshots and record gifs of the terminal.
 - Access to all of ComputerCraft's settings. You can enable and disable Lua 5.1 support to your heart's content.

That said, there's still lots of things missing, so if you've got suggestions, bug reports or would just like to help
out, [head over to the issue tracker][issue]! I will confess the performance is a bit lacking a times, but given that
this is a Lua VM written in Java running in a Javascript VM, I'll say that's pretty understandable.

[cct-doc]: https://github.com/SquidDev-CC/CC-Tweaked/issues/133 "Talkin' 'bout documentation - GitHub"
[mimic]: https://forums.computercraft.cc/index.php?topic=119.0 "Mimic - ComputerCraft forums"
[copy-cat]: https://copy-cat.squiddev.cc/
[mbs]: https://github.com/SquidDev-CC/mbs
[issue]: https://github.com/SquidDev-CC/copy-cat/issues

[^fn]: While we try to keep as close as we can, there are some elements which are impossible to emulate due to the
       restricted environment of a browser.

       For instance, the http API has been almost entirely recreated, and some functionality (such as setting specific
       headers or requesting some sites) is not impossible. As with any emulator, there will be subtle differences in how
       input events (key presses, mouse clicks, etc...) are handled, so do not rely on our behaviour.
