---
title: Petri nets and autocrafting
date: 2022-09-20 10:08:00
description: "Talking about how terrible auto crafting is. Again."
tags: minecraft computercraft autocrafting compsci
math: true
---

> **Disclaimer:** I am by no means an expert in this sort of thing so please do correct me if I get things entirely
> wrong! I should also warn you that, whilst I'll try to keep this as accessible as possible, some prior
> programming/comp-sci knowledge is recommended.


Back in 2018 (geesh, how time flies!) I wrote about how [Autocrafting in Minecraft was NP-hard][ae-sat], by reducing the
Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) to Minecraft recipes. While this shows a lower bound, it _does not_ show an upper
bound.

Since then, I've found something a little more horrifying. Minecraft recipes are equivalent to [Petri nets].

## An introduction to Petri nets
Wikipedia does a far better job than I could, but in summary Petri nets are a special kind of graph, composed of two
kinds of node: _places_ and _transitions_, edges between these nodes, and a _marking_.

 - Places are a store of a resource we call _tokens_. Each place can hold any number of indistinguishable tokens.
 - Transitions move tokens between places. Transitions consume a specific number of tokens (possibly zero) from each
   place and convert them to a new set of tokens which we can store in a different place.
 - Markings describe how many tokens are at each place. A Petri net starts with an _initial marking_, and the marking
   changes as transitions move tokens about.

This might be easier to demonstrate with a diagram. Here we've got a Petri net with the following:

 - Three places, $A$, $B$ and $C$.
 - A single transition $T$, which takes 2 tokens from A and 3 from B. It then produces 1 token, sending it to C.
 - Place A contains 3 tokens, B has 5 and C has 0. This is our initial marking.


```{.dot title="A Petri net with three places and one transition."}
digraph {
  rankdir = LR

  A [label="A\n•••"];
  B [label="B\n•••••"];
  C [label="C"];
  transition [label="T", shape="box"];
  A -> transition [label="2"];
  B -> transition [label="3"];
  transition -> C [label="1"];
}
```

After our transition $T$ fires once, our Petri net ends up with a new marking. There is now 1 token at A, 2 at B and 1
at C.

```{.dot title="The above Petri net after transition T fired."}
digraph {
  rankdir = LR

  A [label="A\n•"];
  B [label="B\n••"];
  C [label="C\n•"];
  transition [label="T", shape="box"];
  A -> transition [label="2"];
  B -> transition [label="3"];
  transition -> C [label="1"];
}
```

## Crafting with Petri nets
If you squint a little bit, you can see how this is a bit like a crafting recipe, with places corresponding to items and
transitions corresponding to recipes. Let's swap out our places and transitions with something from Minecraft, and see
what our network might look like then:

```{.dot .pixelated title="The above Petri net, but using Minecraft items and recipes instead of places and transitions."}
digraph {
  rankdir=LR

  stick [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-stick.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Stick",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  cobblestone [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-cobble.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Cobblestone",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  pick [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-pick.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Stone Pickaxe",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  recipe [
    shapefile = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-recipe.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Crafting a Stone Pickaxe",
    shape = "none",
  ];

  stick -> recipe [label="2"];
  cobblestone -> recipe [label="3"];
  recipe -> pick [label="1"];
}
```

Then, if our storage system contains three sticks and five cobblestone, we'd put three tokens on our stick place, and
five on our cobblestone place - just like the original figure!

It's pretty simple to see how we could extend this for all of Minecraft's crafting recipes, building one absolutely
massive Petri net of items and recipes. We could even extend this network to contain other recipes (such as smelting) or
even other resource types (fluids, exp, etc...), to build an incredibly complex model of Minecraft's crafting system.

> It's worth mentioning here that while we've (informally) shown that we can reduce crafting recipes to Petri nets, we
> haven't gone the other way round: can we generate crafting recipes from arbitrary Petri nets?
>
> Technically, no. Unlike crafting recipes, Petri nets can have more than 9 inputs, and any number of outputs, and so
> there's no simple bijection between the two. However, we're going to ignore this distinction here[^1].

## Autocrafting with Petri nets
It's definitely nice to know that crafting recipes and Petri nets are equivalent. And, given Petri nets are of great
interest to many computer scientists, surely there's some nice tricks we can do to build powerful auto-crafting solvers?

Well, before we get onto that, let's look at one of the common properties of petri nets, and see how it's useful for us.

The _reachability problem_ for Petri nets asks us whether, given a Petri net and an initial marking, if it's possible to
reach a different _target marking_ just by firing our transitions. Or, in Minecraft terms, is it possible to craft this
item given the items available to us?[^2].

This is definitely useful to know! In fact, it sounds just like what we're looking for. And, even better, reachability
in Petri nets is a useful problem in many domains, and so there's been lots of research into it.

Alas, things are not as ideal as they might be. It turns out the complexity of determining reachability in Petri nets is
even worse than that of SAT. _Much_ worse.

## Infinite powder, infinite states
Let's backtrack a bit and talk about a classic Minecraft dupe bug: blaze rods and blaze powder. Vanilla Minecraft
contains a recipe to convert one blaze rod into two blaze powder.

```{.dot .pixelated title="Crafting blaze powder."}
digraph {
  rankdir=LR

  rod [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-blaze-rod.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Blaze Rod",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  powder [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-blaze-powder.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Blaze Powder",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  T [shape="box"];
  rod -> T;
  T -> powder [label="2"];
}
```

Some Minecraft mods also add a recipe to reverse this, such as using transmutation a compressor. _Other_ mods may also
add a more efficient way to get blaze powder, turning one blaze rod into 3 or 4 powder.

```{.dot .pixelated title="Crafting blaze rods from blaze powder."}
digraph {
  rankdir=LR

  rod [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-blaze-rod.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Blaze Rod",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  powder [
    image = "assets/img/posts/2022-09-20-blaze-powder.embed.png",
    label = "",
    tooltip = "Blaze Powder",
    shape = "none", width = "0.75", height = "0.75", margin = "1", fixedsize = "true",
  ];

  subgraph {
    rank = "same"
    T [label="T (vanilla)", color="grey", fontcolor="grey", shape="box"];
    T2 [label="T (mod 1)", shape="box"];
    T3 [label="T (mod 2)", shape="box"];
  }

  rod -> T [label="1", color="grey"];
  T -> powder [label="2", color="grey"];

  rod -> T2 [label="1"];
  T2 -> powder [label="3"];

  T3 -> rod [label="1"];
  powder -> T3 [label="2"];
}
```

We can abuse this interaction between the two extra crafting recipes to obtain infinite blaze powder. First convert one
blaze rod into three powder, and then two powder into one rod. For each cycle, we get one powder left over.

If we were to put these recipes into our autocrafting system, we could then ask it to magic up 100 blaze powder from a
single rod. But what would that actually involve?

As a human, it's easy to describe: just repeat the two recipes a few hundred times until you've got enough. But an
autocrafter doesn't have this sort of luxury; instead it has to apply each step, one at a time. And what starts off as a
simple request (100 of this item please) can explode into a solution exponentially longer than the original problem.[^3]

As a bit of a general rule[^4] in complexity theory, if the _solution_ to a problem is pretty big, then it took even
longer to actually _find_ the solution. Indeed, solving the reachability problem doesn't take exponential time
(EXPTIME), or even exponential space (EXPSPACE). Instead, it instead lives beyond the realm of primitive-recursive
functions, in a complexity class best described as $\mathcal{O}(\text{no})$.

## Autocrafting with Petri nets, pt 2
Well, here we are, at a disappointing end, finding that autocrafting is a near-impossible and intractable problem. And
yet, Applied Energistics and Refined Storage don't seem to have got the memo - they still appear to work fine!

I mentioned this [in the previous rambling][ae-sat], but I think it's worth stressing again: in practice, none of this
really matters. While you _can_ express some really wacky problems with crafting recipes, this sort of weirdness just
doesn't show up in normal play. Aside from storage blocks (iron blocks to iron ingots), I'm not even sure vanilla
Minecraft has any loops!

That said, I do think it's fun to talk about these things. I do still think there's scope for improvement in the world
of autocrafting[^5], and hopefully this inspires someone. And failing that, I at least hope you've learned something!

---

As mentioned at the top, I'm definitely not an expert in any of this! If you do spot a mistake (or a typo!), please let
me know on [the issue tracker][gh] or [get in touch directly][contact].


[ae-sat]: /2018/01/26/ae-sat.html "Autocrafting is NP-hard"
[Petri nets]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petri_net "Petri nets on Wikipedia"
[gh]: https://github.com/Squiddev/squiddev.cc "squiddev.cc on GitHub"
[contact]: /#contact "Contact me"

[^1]: I conceed that "we're going to ignore this" isn't very compelling.

      It's definitely possible to handle more than 9 inputs in a reasonable way: given a transition with 10 inputs, we
      can convert that into two recipes: one which consumes 9 of the inputs and produces a unique item, and a second
      recipe which consumes this unique item and the one remaining input item to produce our final output.

      ```{.dot title="An example decomposition of a transition with 10 inputs and one output. The original transition is split into T1 and T2, using a unique item α as an intermediary."}
      digraph {
        subgraph { rank = same; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; }
        1 -> T1; 2 -> T1; 3 -> T1; 4 -> T1; 5 -> T1; 6 -> T1; 7 -> T1; 8 -> T1; 9 -> T1; 10 -> T2;
        T1 [shape = "box"];
        T2 [shape="box"];
        T1 -> α;
        α -> T2;
        T2 -> Out;
      }
      ```

      However, it's less clear how to hande Petri nets with multiple outputs. The Forge modding API offers the ability
      to provide "remainder items" from a crafting recipe. While it's originally intended for things like turning full
      buckets into empty ones, you could (ab)use it to implement multiple outputs. Though at that point, we're no longer
      really in the vanilla+datapacks world.

[^2]: Technically it's a bit more nuanced than that. The reachability problem considers a specific marking $M$, and so
      considers all items in the storage system, when we only care if the marking contains a specific item.

      We could avoid this problem by adding transitions which can discard spare items, and then defining our target
      marking as containing _just_ the desired item. It's an ugly solution, but _technically_ correct.

      Another option would be to consider crafting as a _liveness_ problem. This asks whether a specific _transition_ is
      reachable. However, liveness is also in EXPSPACE, so isn't any more practical to solve.

[^3]: There is a lot of over-simplification going on here, both in the theory of complexity, and in the specific case of
      Petri-nets and auto-crafting. See the disclaimer at the top of this post!

      In such a closed system, it should be perfectly possible for an auto-crafter to optimise for this sort of cycle.
      However, it's always possible to build a more complicated system where some optimisation no longer applied. For
      instance, maybe crafting blaze rods from blaze powder consumes a small amount of durability of a catylst. Now
      you've got to keep track of that, maybe craft a new catalyst (which again, is a whole new problem), etc...

[^4]: Again, over-simplification. And at this point making a lot of assumptions about the fact that some complexity
      classes are strict subsets of others.

[^5]: I do really want to fiddle around with implementing something like [this paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07912
      "Directed Reachability for Infinite-State Systems"). Though I can't say I've really groked all the details.
