---
title: "Better parser errors for Lua"
date: 2024-02-09 19:00:00
description: "I continue on my never-ending quest to reinvent the wheel, and this time bring you along for the ride."
tags: lua ocaml illuaminate
---

One of the passion projects I love to work on, but don't talk about very often is [illuaminate]. illuaminate aims to be
a comprehensive static analysis toolkit for Lua, combining type-checking, linting and documentation generation into one
program.

[illuaminate]: https://github.com/Squiddev/illuaminate

This is ambitious goal, and I've almost definitely bitten off more than I can chew! For now, illuaminate is in the
awkward state of being "good enough" that I can cope with the current functionality, but a long way from being usable by
anyone else.

One thing I've been wanting to improve for a while is parser error messages. Being able to parse an input program is the
most basic part of the whole of illuaminate, and we still do an embarrassingly bad job!

Let's take a common mistake we've all made, using `=` to check for equality rather than `==`.

```lua
if a = b then
  print("Hello")
end
```


If we feed this into illuaminate, it'll spit out this message:

```
Unexpected `=`: This is unexpected after a simple expression.
   │
 1 │ if a = b then
   │      ^
```

It's _technically_ better than what PUC Lua does (`'then' expected near '='`), but only in the sense that it's prettier!
The message is still rather useless.

Under the hood, illuaminate uses [Menhir](https://gallium.inria.fr/~fpottier/menhir/), an LR(1) parser generator for
OCaml.

## Shift-reduce and all that guff
Oh gosh, I'm going to have to talk about LR(1) parsers aren't I? The whole subject of parsing programming languages is a
wide field (and often a whole course at university), so I'll try to keep this brief.

When we talk about parsing programming languages, it's useful to distinguish between the syntax of the language (or
"grammar"), and implementation details of how parsing actually happens.

The grammar of a language is defined using three sets of objects:

 - **Terminals:** Terminals are the individual tokens fed into the parser, such as keywords (`if`), symbols (`=`) or
   identifiers (`a`).

 - **Non-terminals:** A non-terminal is something the parser can produce by consuming other terminals and
   non-terminals. These correspond to syntactic elements in a programming language, such as expressions or statements.

 - **Productions:** Productions are the rules that describe how to parse a non-terminal from a sequence of terminals and
   non-terminals. For instance, the production `stmt -> IF expr THEN block END` says "a statement can be formed by the
   `if` keyword, an expression, the `THEN` keyword, a block, and finally the `END` keyword).

Parser generators then have the tricky job of taking all of this, and building an efficient parser out of it. Menhir
does this by building a complex state machine called an LR(1) parser.

Rather than having a single state, like finite state machines, LR(1) parsers have a stack of states. For each input
non-terminal (called the lookahead[^lookahead]), they take the state at the top of the stack, and use a big lookup table
to decide whether to push (or "shift") a new state onto the stack, or to apply a production - popping several items off
the stack and "reducing" it to a single new state.

[^lookahead]: The "1" in LR(1) refers to the fact that it only needs a single "lookahead" token.

I'm definitely glossing over some of the details here (for instance, how reductions are performed), but it's not really
relevant here.

Instead, we'll talk about one more useful bit of parser terminology: "items". These are effectively in-progress
productions, using an extra `.`  to show how far we've parsed something. For instance, `stmt -> IF . expr THEN block
END` is an item where we've consumed an `if` keyword and are now trying to parse the rest of the `if` statement.

One useful property of LR(1) parsers is that every item has one or more states associated with it (and visa versa). For
instance, our `stmt -> IF . expr THEN block END` is represented by exactly one LR(1) state - the state we get after
shifting an `if` keyword.

Right, let's get back on track…

## Error messages in Menhir
LR(1) parser generators are a little notorious for leading to bad error messages. Thankfully, [Menhir has a simple but
clever solution](http://gallium.inria.fr/~fpottier/menhir/manual.html#sec72) - it finds every state in the LR(1) machine
which can error, and gets the developer to write an error message for each state.


In the case with the unexpected `=`, our parser is in a state where it is trying to parse an expression, and hit an
unexpected token. Menhir will show us the exact productions its trying to parse in this state, and prompt us to write an
error message:

```
program: RETURN IDENT TRUE
##
## Ends in an error in state: 35.
##
## atom -> simple_expr . [ WHILE ... ]
## call -> simple_expr . COLON ident call_args [ WHILE ... ]
## name -> simple_expr . DOT ident [ WHILE ... ]
## name -> simple_expr . OSQUARE expr CSQUARE [ WHILE ... ]
##
## The known suffix of the stack is as follows:
## simple_expr
##

This is unexpected after a simple expression.
```

This actually can work surprisingly well, but it's also incredibly particular. As an expression can never be followed by
an `=`, due to how LR(1) parsers work, we'll get an immediate error. However, if we'd written a different symbol (maybe
`]`), then the parser will finish parsing the expression, and then try to look for a `then`, giving us an entirely
different error!

```
Unexpected `]`: Expected `then` after `if` condition.
   │
 1 │ if a ] b then
   │      ^
```

At the start of 2023 (yes, this is another blog post for work I did a year ago!), I started looking for alternative
options, and came across the incredible [lrgrep](https://github.com/let-def/lrgrep) by Frédéric Bour.

Rather than writing error messages for particular LR(1) states, lrgrep allows you to write patterns which match against
the whole parser stack, allowing far more powerful and context-aware error reporting.

## A basic lrgrep rule
Let's see this in practice. We'd like to write an error message for the case where an expression is followed by an
equals sign. In lrgrep's pattern-matching language, this would look something like this:

```ocaml
(* Match `expr() = ` in any other context: probably wanted `expr() == `. *)
| [expr] @ EQUALS
  { Error.Use_double_equals (token, $startloc(token), $endloc(token)) }
```

Let's take this bit by bit:

 - `[expr]`: This matches any parser stack where the head of it reduces (the `[...]`) to an expression (`expr`).
 - `@ EQUALS`: Anything after the `@` matches the lookahead token. In this case, we want to report an error when the
   next token is an `EQUALS` (`=`).
 - `{ ... }`: This then constructs our error message and returns it. Here, we include the position of the erroneous
   token.

Now then, all we need to do is write an error message and try it out!

```
Unexpected `=` in expression.
   │
 1 │ if a = b then
   │      ^
Tip: Replace this with `==` to check if two values are equal.
```

## Filtering rules
The peril with witting error messages like this is that you don't want to predict your user too much. There's always
going to be some case you haven't considered, and you don't want to provide a misleading error message!

For instance, a programmer might instead be trying to create a table with an expression key. The correct syntax for this
is `{ ["some expression"] = 123 }`, but it's easy to forget those square brackets:

```lua
return {
  "some expression" = 123,
}
```

If we then start yelling about `==` here, then it's probably not very helpful. Fortunately, lrgrep allows us to write a
more precise error message:

```ocaml
(* Match `expr() =` in tables: probably wanted `[expr()] = ...` *)
| [_ / table_entry: expr .] @ EQUALS
  { Error.Table_key_equals (token, $startloc(token), $endloc(token)) }
```

This is a familiar pattern to what we had before (`[...] @ EQUALS`), but instead of matching an expression, we've got
something a little more complex. Let's break it down again.

 - `_` is just a wildcard, matching anything.
 - `/` then filters this wildcard, restricting us to a set of LR(1) states.
 - `table_entry: expr .` filters us to match all LR(1) states corresponding to the `table_entry -> expr .` item.

The effect of this rule is similar to our much-simpler `[expr] @ EQUALS`, but instead only applies when immediately
inside a table!

```
Unexpected `=` in expression.
   │
 2 │   "some expression" = 123,
   │                     ^
Tip: Wrap the preceding expression in `[` and `]` to use it as a table key.
```

## In closing
I've been really impressed with lrgrep so far. I've been using it both in illuaminate, and the much more popular [CC:
Tweaked](https://tweaked.cc/) (blog post about how that works soon™️), and it's been working flawlessly.

One thing I cannot shout enough about is how easy it is to write context-sensitive error messages. These are definitely
possible to do in recursive descent parsers, but can end up being a little inelegant.

Many, many thanks to Frédéric Bour for all their work on lrgrep. They've been incredibly helpful in answering all the
questions I've had.

If you're interested, do check out [the full lrgrep rules][rules] used in illuaminate[^horrible].

[rules]: https://github.com/SquidDev/illuaminate/blob/master/src/parser/parse_errors.mlyl
[^horrible]: Though maybe not the rest of the cod - it's pretty nasty in places!

Thanks for reading!
